[SE-0526] Feedback and refinements for withTaskCancellationHandler, and CancellationError.Reason (#3306)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/0526-deadline.md

This API uses the base cancellation to communicate the expiration of the deadline.
The information to differentiate a cancellation due to normal task cancellation is

> expanded to handle two new forms of cancellation; a cancellation due to normal task cancellation

Reviewer: Since it's not two new reasons, but one new reason really

```suggestion
expanded to handle a new reason for cancellation: 
```

> and a cancellation due to deadline expiration. Since this is not a closed set of possible reasons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due to deadline expiration. Since this is not a closed set of possible reasons
```

public struct CancellationError: Error {
  @nonexhaustive
  public enum Reason {

>     case userRequested

Reviewer: I don't think that's right; it's not user requested per se, throws out of groups and async lets also cause this;

We can discuss this in SE review though.

has been already written the developer already has handled the cases of cancellation without a 
given reason; this will continue to be the case.

> Note: For now the `Reason` type is restricted to known simple enumeration values without any

Reviewer: Needs the > to render correctly.

```suggestion
> Note: The `Reason` type is restricted to known simple enumeration values without any
```

Not implying anything future looking

}
```

This also means that when a task is cancelled it communicates with any task cancellation handlers
and passes that information to the appropriate handler. 

```swift
public nonisolated(nonsending) func withTaskCancellationHandler<Return, Failure>(
  operation: nonisolated(nonsending) () async throws(Failure) -> Return,
  onCancel handler: sending (CancellationError.Reason) -> Void
) async throws(Failure) -> Return 
```

This function works exactly as the existing `withTaskCancellationHandler` does today, 
except that the `onCancel` handler is passed the reason for cancellation.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Furthermore, the cancellation reason can be retrieved from the current Task similar to how cancellation is checked.

```swift
extension Task where Success == Never, Failure == Never {
  /// Returns the current task's cancellation reason if the task was cancelled.
  ///
  /// This property will be set if `Task.isCancelled` returns `true`.
  ///
  /// - Important: The cancellation reason can only change once during the lifetime of a task from `nil` to a specific reason. After this initial change the reason will not change.
  public static var cancellationReason: CancellationError.Reason? { get }
}
```
```

Reviewer: Missing the `UnsafeCurrentTask` version;

Seems we raced doing the update; I prepared a PR just now over here updating the same, including the missing bits 😅 

https://github.com/phausler/swift-evolution/pull/1

The reason specified will then be available to the `CancellationError` and can be retrieved from the `reason`
property on the cancellation error.

#### Accessing active deadlines

External systems may need to interoperate with active deadlines. This means that the
applied deadline needs to be retrievable, however this particularly becomes
tricky since the clock is generic for the deadlines. To that end

> the accessor for the active deadline is generic for a clock type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the accessor for the active deadline accepts a generic clock instance:
```

```swift
extension Task where Success == Never, Failure == Never {
  public static var hasActiveDeadline: Bool { get }

>   public static func activeDeadline<C: Clock & Identifiable>(for clock: C) -> C.Instant?

Reviewer: Signature looks good, though we should have the same defaulted parameter here as we do on the write side

Author: Im not sure that is really absolutely needed; since the query side should likely consider all available clocks (or at the very least all system clocks) a default value doesnt really add much, where as the side that is setting a deadline is more so just interested in a time frame; and that is going to be the lesser amount of needed knowledge. So I would actually say that not having a default value is more a feature than a shortcoming because it forces folks on the reading side to consider what clocks to support.

Reviewer: Hmm, we can leave this as a topic for SE review then, let's see what folks think

}
```

If any deadline is active then the static property `hasActiveDeadline` returns true.  

> This only applies to the current task if the execution of that task is within a call

Reviewer: A little confusing wording about current task only? what if were a child task where the parent had a deadline set and therefore we do too

to `withDeadline`. This allows for determining the return of the `deadline` static
function to be used to know if a known clock has a value being applied as a current
deadline. This does mean that the usage must be aware of the potential clocks being 
used. This is however a requirement since to use the deadline itself the clock must 
be known for any sort of usage to an external system.

```swift
if Task.hasActiveDeadline {
  if let deadline = Task.activeDeadline(for: ContinuousClock()) {
    // use the deadline as a ContinuousClock.Instant
  }
  if let deadline = Task.activeDeadline(for: SuspendingClock()) {
    // use the deadline as a SuspendingClock.Instant
  }
}
```

When the call to `activeDeadline(for:)` is made, the query looks up the most narrow
application of any specified deadline with that clock, if the current nesting of 

> `withDeadline` calls does not used the specified clock type then the next nesting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`withDeadline` calls does not use the specified clock type then the next nesting
```

up the call stack is used.

If the nesting of `withDeadline` is stacked with a `ContinuousClock` deadline of 
"in two seconds" and then a `SuspendingClock` of "in three seconds" and a new
nesting is made of a `ContinuousClock` is made for "in 10 seconds" the last
10 seconds is known to be less narrow than the outer 2 seconds continuous clock 
deadline. This means that within the scope of the "in 10 seconds" deadline the query
for the `activeDeadline(for: ContinuousClock.self)` would return the deadline of within 
2 seconds and the `activeDeadline(for: SuspendingClock.self)` would return the deadline
of within 3 seconds. Since clock instants cannot be compared without potentially
arbitrarily lossy conversions it means that the query for the current applied deadline

> is only accurate to the specific clock type given. 

Reviewer: Good example but this should be a code snippet and not just text for clarity

#### Identification of Clocks for coalescing 

The expected behavior when setting a deadline is that any active deadline, given a specific clock,
will always apply with the most narrow deadline available. Specifically if a deadline is 
active for an expiration of `in 10 seconds` and a new deadline is applied for `in 5 seconds` 
relative both relative to the continuous clock, then the applied deadline within the new

> scope is the `in 5 seconds`. Likewise if the reverse was applied; where it is already at `in 5 seconds`

Reviewer: “in 5 seconds” isn’t code, so it’s unusual to use a code styling to it, use italics instead? To not confuse people like this is some code syntax they don’t know about

Author: ill change to italics, that should read better.

and a new scope is applied to `in 10 seconds` both on the continuous clock, then the internal
logic will effectively skip the `in 10 seconds` since that deadline is known to beyond the current
active deadline. This must have some way of determining if a given clock passed in to 
the `withDeadline` functions is that same specific clock. To that end, the clocks are 

> required to be identified. The two major clocks; `ContinuousClock` and `SuspendingClock`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required to be identifiable. The two major clocks; `ContinuousClock` and `SuspendingClock`
```

both will gain a new conformance to `Identifiable` and each of which will have a new ID

> type of `SystemClockID`. As a side effect this means that new APIs can be written as: 

Reviewer: It’s not a side effect, it just means that

Reviewer: Im not sure why we’re writing this at all? I don’t think we need to write “constraint can be used” whenever we add some type somewhere. This might be confused with some of our APIs actually doing this?

Author: fair; will remove

`where C: Clock & Identifiable, C.ID == SystemClockID`. That particular refinement not only
allows for the direct identification of the specific clock but also a constraint to the 
standard system clocks.

> Note: since the system clock may grow additional identifiers it is left as non-exhaustive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: Since the system clock may grow additional identifiers it is left as non-exhaustive.
```

```swift
@nonexhaustive
public enum SystemClockID: Hashable {
  case continuous
  case suspending
}

extension ContinuousClock: Identifiable {
  public var id: SystemClockID { .continuous }
}

extension SuspendingClock: Identifiable {
  public var id: SystemClockID { .suspending }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: We should document that in theory this is to support instance clocks as well, if users choose to write such

Reviewer: This isn't addressed yet? // edit: now it is

   explicit `withDeadline` API would remain useful even if such a mechanism were added.

## Changelog

> - 1.2 Revisde for feedback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 1.2 Revised for feedback
```
